# Embive (Embedded RISC-V) [![Latest Version]][crates.io] [![docs]][docs.rs] [![msrv]][Rust 1.81]

[Latest Version]: https://img.shields.io/crates/v/embive.svg
[crates.io]: https://crates.io/crates/embive
[docs]: https://docs.rs/embive/badge.svg
[docs.rs]: https://docs.rs/embive
[msrv]: https://img.shields.io/crates/msrv/embive.svg?label=msrv&color=lightgray
[Rust 1.81]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2024/09/05/Rust-1.81.0.html

Embive is a low-level sandboxing library focused on the embedding of untrusted code for constrained environments.  
As it interprets RISC-V bytecode, multiple languages are supported out of the box by Embive (Rust, C, C++, Zig, Nim, etc.).  
By default, it doesn’t require external crates, dynamic memory allocation or the standard library (`no_std` & `no_alloc`).

Embive is designed for any error during execution to be recoverable, allowing the host to handle it as needed.
As so, no panics should occur on release builds, despite the bytecode being executed.

Currently, it supports the `RV32I[MA]Zicsr_Zifencei` instruction set (Check [Features](#features)).

## Bytecode
The bytecode can be generated by any compiler that supports the RISC-V 32-bit instruction set, as long as it can output a flat
binary file (`.bin`) statically linked to the correct addresses (Code at `0x00000000`, RAM at `0x80000000`).

## Templates
The following templates are available for programs that run inside Embive:
- [Rust template](https://github.com/embive/embive-rust-template)
- [C/C++ Template](https://github.com/embive/embive-c-template)

## Example
```rust
use core::num::NonZeroI32;
use embive::{
    engine::{Config, Engine, EngineState, SYSCALL_ARGS},
    memory::{Memory, SliceMemory},
    registers::CPURegister, Error,
};

// A simple syscall implementation. Check [`embive::engine::SyscallFn`].
fn syscall<M: Memory>(
    nr: i32,
    args: &[i32; SYSCALL_ARGS],
    memory: &mut M
) -> Result<i32, NonZeroI32> {
    // Match the syscall number
    match nr {
        1 => Ok(args[0] + args[1]), // Add two numbers (arg[0] + arg[1])
        2 => match memory.load(args[0] as u32) { // Load from RAM (arg[0])
            Ok(val) => Ok(i32::from_le_bytes(val)), // RISC-V is little endian
            Err(_) => Err(1.try_into().unwrap()), // Could not read memory
        },
        _ => Err(2.try_into().unwrap()), // Not implemented
    }
}

fn main() -> Result<(), Error> {
    // "10 + 20" using syscalls (load from ram and add two numbers)
    let code = &[
        0x93, 0x08, 0x20, 0x00, // li   a7, 2      (Syscall nr = 2)
        0x13, 0x05, 0x10, 0x00, // li   a0, 1      (a0 = 1)
        0x13, 0x15, 0xf5, 0x01, // slli a0, a0, 31 (a0 << 31) (0x80000000)
        0x93, 0x02, 0xa0, 0x00, // li   t0, 10     (t0 = 10)
        0x23, 0x20, 0x55, 0x00, // sw   t0, 0(a0)  (Store t0 in addr. a0)
        0x73, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, // ecall           (Syscall, load from arg0)
        0x93, 0x08, 0x10, 0x00, // li   a7, 1      (Syscall nr = 1)
        0x13, 0x05, 0x40, 0x01, // li   a0,20      (a0 = 20)
        0x73, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, // ecall           (Syscall, add two args)
        0x73, 0x00, 0x10, 0x00, // ebreak          (Halt)
    ];

    // 1KB of RAM
    let mut ram = [0; 1024];

    // Create memory from code and RAM slices
    let mut memory = SliceMemory::new(code, &mut ram);

    // Create engine config
    let config = Config::default()
        .with_syscall_fn(Some(syscall))
        .with_instruction_limit(10);

    // Create engine
    let mut engine = Engine::new(&mut memory, config)?;

    // Run it until ebreak, triggering an interrupt after every wfi
    loop {
        match engine.run()? {
            EngineState::Running => {},
            EngineState::Waiting => engine.interrupt()?,
            EngineState::Halted => break,
        }
    }

    // Check the result (Ok(30))
    assert_eq!(
        engine.registers.cpu.get(CPURegister::A0 as usize)?,
        0
    );
    assert_eq!(
        engine.registers.cpu.get(CPURegister::A1 as usize)?,
        30
    );
    
    Ok(())
}
```

## System Calls
System calls are a way for the untrusted code to interact with the host environment.
When provided to the engine, the system call function will be called when the `ecall` instruction is executed.
You can check more information about system calls in the `engine::SyscallFn` documentation.

## Interrupts
Embive allows interrupts for the interpreted code to be triggered from the host. This is a complement to the system
calls, allowing asynchronous communication between the host and the interpreted code.
You can check more information about interrupts in the `engine::Engine::interrupt` documentation.

## Features
Check the available features and their descriptions below:

- `m_extension`:
    - Enable the RV32M extension (multiply and divide instructions).
        - Disabled by default, no additional dependencies.
- `a_extension`:
    - Enable the RV32A extension (atomic instructions).
        - Disabled by default, no additional dependencies.

## Roadmap
- [x] Fully support `RV32IMAZicsr_Zifencei` (machine mode)
    - [x] RV32I Base Integer Instruction Set
    - [x] M Extension (Multiplication and Division Instructions)
    - [x] Zifencei
        - Implemented as a no-operation as it isn't applicable (Single HART, no cache, no memory-mapped devices, etc.).
    - [x] A Extension (Atomic Instructions)
    - [x] Zicsr
        - Implement machine mode CSRs (Needed for supporting interrupts)
    - [x] Machine mode instructions (MRET & WFI)
- [x] System Calls
    - Function calls from interpreted to native code
- [x] Resource limiter
    - Yield the engine after a configurable amount of instructions are executed.
- [x] CI/CD
    - Incorporate more tests into the repository and create test automations for PRs
- [x] Interrupts
    - Interpreted code interruption triggered by the host.
- [ ] Bytecode optimization
    - Allow in-place compilation to a format easier to parse.
        - Less bit-shifting, faster instruction matching, etc.
    - Should be kept as close as possible to native RISC-V bytecode.

## What about Floating Point?
Fully implementing the RISC-V F and/or D extensions would require using a soft-float library, as Rust doesn't 
support custom rounding modes nor does it expose the IEEE exception flags.

As the soft-float libraries available do not satisfy my requirements (must be portable, safe, no_std, and
support all rounding modes and exception flags), this feature will be halted until (if) an alternative is found.

## What about Compressed Instructions?
RISC-V Compressed extension adds 16-bit instruction support for the most used operations, which can decrease the binary size in about 25%.  

While smaller binaries are always welcomed, the compressed extension has a far more complex decoding process as 
the instruction format cannot be know just by the opcode. Beyond that, some instructions can only be distinguished 
after decoding almost all the data, even in cases where the format is very different between them (ex: C.ANDI and C.SUB).

As handling this would decrease the performance of Embive, as well as make the future JIT/AOT feature a lot more 
difficult, the RVC extension won't be supported (at least for now).

## Minimum supported Rust version (MSRV)
Embive is guaranteed to compile on stable Rust 1.81 and up.

## License

Embive is licensed under either of

- Apache License, Version 2.0 ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  <http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>)
- MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or <http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT>)

at your option.

## Contribution

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted
for inclusion in the work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be
dual licensed as above, without any additional terms or conditions.